So today is the 26th of September 2019. This is Dr. Adiola Dowis. Can you say your full
name?
My full name is Carlton Peets.
Carlton Peets. And where were you born?
St. Kitts, the best island in the Caribbean.
And what is your birth date?
What were your parents' names?
My parents was married to make a street. My mother was Vivian Peets. My father was Izzy
Gale Sutton, which is also my middle name.
Izzy?
E-Z-K-I-E-L.
Ezekiel.
Yeah, just like in the Bible.
Okay. And what did they do for a living?
Well, at the time there wasn't much job for their kind of education. My mother used to
be a king and my father cut them.
Oh, okay. And did you have brothers and sisters?
Yes. Four sisters and one brother.
And where are you in the...
In the middle. I'm the fourth out of the six.
Okay. And what was growing up in St. Kitts like? What do you remember?
Well, growing up in St. Kitts, I was very, very happy. We have everything, sports, all
the... I mean, go to the mountain and do everything boys do.
What was school like? Did you like school?
Oh, yes. Not at first. But first, when I started, I used to like going down to see water. And
once my sister came to look for me, that I didn't feel like going to school. And she
got a joy cane because we had a lot of sugar canes in St. Kitts. But one field was there
barren. And she took up one of those and every time she walked and she catch up to me, it's
a good thing. And unfortunately, my classroom was outside the school. I was in what they
call outside class, put it away. And when I turned around the corner, I saw my class
outside and I started drawing my eyes because I didn't want them to know that I got licks
to go to school. And then went in school, my sister knew the teacher and she said,
I could tell you her name now, Clarice. She named Clarice Canes. And my sister said, Clarice,
could you mark him present for me? She said, oh yes, I will. And then with this time, just
everybody else moving out, she called me back and she said, your sister didn't send you
her name. I said, who tell you so? And she said, and she put her hand across my forehead
and she wiped off the salt so that when you wipe off the salt, you know you was down the
sea. Because he left his mark. And then she told me, I won't mention the words she told
me as a teacher, but she said, next time you run away from school again without any
permission, I'll startle myself. I mean that was nice, soft words she told me, but it didn't
like that she told me. But you did enjoy school. Oh yes, after that morning, first man in school
is me. First person in school from that episode was me. And Taylor reached seventh standard.
Then I had a little, well I used to do what they call gardening and go to school. So my
boss was a white man, he named me Mr. Ball. This is after you left school? No, before,
while I'm going to school, go to work in the morning, well there's a little garden, just
water the plants and pick out any little weeds. Because if you pick out the weeds every day,
you won't have much to do. So you water the garden and go to school in the morning and
after school you go back in the afternoon. Then the boss and the mistress fall in love
with me, so they give me everything. They used to treat me like their own son or children
because they had three children. So I was one of the Balls. Black Ball. Yeah, so. Okay,
so what kinds of things did you want to be when you grew up at that age? Did you have
any dreams? I didn't have much dream, but I know for a fact I wasn't going in the cane
field to work. That's for a fact. Because I always say if my mother weed them and my
father cut them, there's no place there for me. So. Did you see it as a very hard job?
Cutting the cane? Oh yes. Oh yes. And they were, they wasn't paid the right rate and
everything through politics and so on. And I'll tell you what, the man who was in charge
was a blacker man than me. All the days only black and black, but he was really black.
And he was in charge of everything. Negotiation with the Prime Minister Robert Llewellyn Bratcher.
Was Sunkist at that time very segregated? Yes, I will say yes because I mean you never
used to see black people working in a bank and so on. And if you want a high job, let's
say working down for government, you have to go to grammar school which was the high
school in the land at the moment. So unless you go to grammar school you know you can't
get a good job. So you just have to take the menial jobs what left. Was it easy for black
children to go to grammar school? No. No because I mean you have the, what's the name? The
what's it called? I can't remember exactly what you call it. But then if you're bright
enough and you could pass the entrance fee, the entrance fee is that your parents will
have to pay for you. Like me, I could have passed the entrance fee but my head teacher
Mrs. Williams went and asked my father which he could afford to because his cousin was
paying for one of his sons to go to the same school. And he said no. Why did he say no?
Well, just like most West Indian fathers, they forget their children just grew up. And
he said no. And he told Mrs. Williams straight, he's only my mother, but at that time you
know we used to talk like we were speaking. He said we're only my mother you know and
I can't do it. And she was a bit gutted. And like a friend of mine who was in the same
class, he went to grammar school because he passed the, oh god I can't remember what
it is now. And a friend, the other friend of mine who was, he went to Convent School
and that one, one end up as an engineer and the other one was the chief accountant in
one of the banks in St. Kitts. And me, just left behind. So that's why as I said to you
early on, after I got that job and the man told me to go and sell myself, I said to myself,
no way, I'm not looking for more work, I'm not filling out nothing.
What job is this? You mean the gardening?
No, no, it was just caretaker of the arms, caretaker supervisor, you know and then was
in charge of the cleaners and so on. But there again there was a lot of prejudice in that
as well too.
So after you left school you got that job as an accountant?
No, well just before I came from St. Kitts to here, I used to work in the batter, batter
shoe store.
Oh.
Oh yes, as the, what's it called it now, the, of course, as a young man, I was a young
man. I used to make sure, go to pass the warrants and so on to get the shoes out, the
customs and things like that. And then I had somebody else, another friend of mine who
used to clean out the store. His name was Vernon Twelves, you know.
So what was the decision to come to the UK?
Well, it was a tough decision. First that if it was left to my mother, I want to be
but through my sister was here, my oldest sister, I had a choice. She was going to send
for me and I could get a job down the health center as, what do you call him now, sanitary
inspector. I would have got that job because it was already earmarked for me. Yeah, because
through friends and so on and through us, I'm not, I was a nice boy growing up. My people,
well, some, I won't say friends, but elderly people who know the man, they tell him and
so on and a good word, very good word. So it was like this, which I would come first
at the end of the month. If the money come first, which I explained to the man in here,
Mr. Buchanan, he was in charge. Said, Mr. Buchanan, if the money come first before the
ending of the month, I'll be going to England. If you don't, I won't be going to England,
I'll take the job. And unfortunately or fortunately, the money came first. And then as I said,
it came to my sister. What were you expecting? What did you think of England before you knew
about it, before you came here? Well, be honest with you, you always say England, do this
England, is that an England? The East African women were saying England pay with gold and
streets pay with gold and all them sort of nonsense. But then when you look at the, some
of the West Indian readers, what they used to send for us. You see cows going up pushing,
pushing cow up the ladder instead of going up on the roof to cut the grass. Well, I mean,
as Barber said, there was fooling us. And then they get some other West Indian book,
I think it's visual English books and that was a different scenario to the old West Indian
books. So in school they were actually teaching you propaganda? Well, that was the English
teaching. And you were still a colony, Sunkets were still a colony? Yes. So when you came
over, you were on a British passport? That's right. So you were British? British, yes.
Well, I still put down British up to now. And how did you travel? Did you come by boat
or by boat? Both. I flew from Sunkets to Antigua, from Antigua to Trinidad. And then
we caught the boat in Trinidad. It was about a good 20 of us from Sunkets that day. A woman,
she had about six children with her and me and my friends and so on. Do you remember
the boat? No, I can't remember it. I tried to look for it at Scania or something like
that, but I can't remember it rightly so I won't tell you. Do you remember the journey?
Well, the most I can remember is when we were in Trinidad. We had a good time in Trinidad.
As boys, you know, we went up and down the place. And because there was a few more boys
joined from Dominica, they were from Dominica with us in Trinidad. So, you know, boys will
be discussing as usual. And you used to have some good times. This woman on the boat, she
could speak Spanish. So everything we want, we ask her. Well, she knew me as well and
she knew my parents. So you only ask her to feel like chicken today, feel like fish today
and she will order whatever you ask her to. So the boat, the crew was Spanish speaking?
Yes, but they could speak English as well. Okay. And do you remember anything else about
the journey? Was it a happy journey? Well, as I said, it was happy because some of us
were, especially this fellow from Dominica, I mean, we were supposed to be, let's say,
on the lower deck. He carried me all up on the top deck and everything and foolish me
for him. Even though we were wrong or not supposed to be, we were still going. So before
I came up here, you know, I was discussing it. How long were you? How long were you?
I can't even remember. I think around that. Around 20 years old? Yeah. And when did you
come? So what was it like when you arrived? Well, we went to Madrid. We landed in Madrid
in Spain. And my friend is leaning over the railing for the ship because I leave from
Spain to come to Cardiff by train. But leaning over the railing, you see people. Oh no, for
now from Spain, we leave from Spain to Southampton. And then you see some people, when the Spanish
women, well, I mean, they were more or less dressed in black as well. And when you see
them speaking, you see steam coming out of their mouth. So when I tell my friend, look
at them, steam coming out of their mouth, he says, you too. I said, you too. So you
came in winter perhaps? Yes, it was in February I came here. What were you wearing, do you
remember? Were you ready for the weather? No. Funny enough, I had a cardigan that I
brought from home because that was only for style, really, because in the West End you
don't need them. So luckily I wore it. What color was the cardigan? I think roughly was
red and black. Red, white and black. Yeah, white was up here, red up here, white in the
middle and black down here. Could always remember that. So what was your first impression of
Britain? So you saw the coal coming out of the mouth and when you step out, what was
it like for you? Well, we stay on the ship and then we came to Southampton and then we
land in Southampton. Well, me, all on my own. I don't know nobody. So I asked a man, look,
he was very polite and kind and he said, oh, I'll go up the rail and drop you up the
road. Well, on hindsight now, I think I was taking a chance because I don't know the people,
I don't know the place, so he couldn't go anywhere with me or whatever because he was
a man, he was a boy. So, you know, took the chance but I mean everything worked out to
the end and he said, if you don't know what to do, ask any one of them people, they in
black, like the porters on the railway. And then? Then come to Cardiff. How come you came
to Cardiff? Is that where your sister was? Yes. And why did she come to Cardiff? Why
Cardiff? Well, I thought, my home father is one half pay for her, so when they say half,
I wouldn't like to elaborate too much on that part of it. But let's say for convenience
sake, my father sent four. Okay, and he was here already? Yes. Okay, so you already had
a crew waiting for you? No, nobody was waiting for me. I had to find my way from the train
station to South Church Street. You know where South Church Street is? What was that like?
Well, then on my way almost out of the train station, my brother and brother-in-law turned
up. So they helped me. We walked down the back canal, you know, and then come down the
back. And then the first person I met was a friend, a fellow. He was much older than
me. And he used to, when we were in the grammar school, we played sports and so on. And Sunday
school time coming up, and we don't go. He'd call us. Come on, you had to go Sunday school,
because Sunday school. But then when I look, the man had a big long cigarette in his mouth.
I said, well, cook, you don't do names like that. As a Christian, he said, boy, it's a
different story over here, you know. Was he from St. Kitts as well? Yes, yeah. Well, and
he was a good cook eater too. And then more or less, you could say I learned from him.
Did you find the transition easy? So you came to Butown? Yes. Did you find the transition
easy from, besides the weather, from St. Kitts to Butown? Yes, because I mean, almost not
good. It was okay for me, because nobody really used to bother me or something like
that. And I had a friend. His brother was here as well. Well, you might know him, what
we call Dexter. Well, many grew up from the same village. And so I had a, you could say
a friend, so we could correspond with each other.
What was Butown like at that time? So you didn't have to go to school at that age? No.
What did you do? I had to work. Soon as I came, I had to get the first job. But as I
said, I won't go into the details, because it might be embarrassing for somebody else.
Okay. So roughly, was it easy to get a job? At the time, no. The most jobs you'll get
are factory jobs, because my brother-in-law was working down the post office. I applied
for a job down there, and they told me they'll let me know. I'm still waiting for them to
let me know. About a year or so ago, I found a letter, but in vexation, I ripped it up,
I think. The guy said, look, they're supposed to let me know, and they're supposed to be
this and that. So. Was it like that? Was that a common thing? Going for different jobs and
them saying they'll get back to you and not getting back to you? Well, as I said, I didn't
have too many jobs, but those that I really went for, I got. So, I mean, first job I refused.
Was a place named John Williams over East Mores, and the place they wanted me to work
where they had vacancy is a place they call Knockout, the Knockout. The Knockout is like
a furnace. I just come from the West Indies, I'm hot already. I mean, let's say up there
in the center, the furnace down here, and I'm sweating. I said, no, thanks. And then
when I went to a place named Super Oil Seals, got a job there. Then after about 11, 12 years
or so, I pack up Super Oil Seals and went to the skill center. We learned welding. And
after about a year or so, place over there, my sense, they used to make radiators and
they fold up. So then I was working for nearly three years. And then, as I said, I used to
come to the center often, and the aviator named John Winslet, this morning, he sent
an application in the Western Mail, and he got one for me. And he called me and he told
me, here, as I said to you before, here you are now, go and sell yourself, fill out the
form. And after filling out the form, I said, Mr. Winslet, could you look at it for me and
see? He said, why, no. Because if you make a mistake, you're going to say it's true me,
but you ain't get the job. And as I said to you, the only form, I mean, internally in
this council, because of the housing department, I did apply for different jobs. And I passed
them, but especially the last one was to be like the, what's it called, over Nelson House
here. And after the lot, well, you might know some university people did apply as well too,
but some of them was too qualified. So I got the job, because of the rest who left,
I had the best specification of the rest. But what you think happened? My boss, she
named Blondwin Lloyd, she gave it to one of her friends. And she said, I'm going to
picks me up from Bethesda health hospital, checked there〜now. Not only I connected to
a computer, it was my wszystko, I was busy. And I got up, it was minutes before the weekend,
10 or 11 o'clock, in the morning, three hours before the route came up, I had a call from
said, oh, you got a watertight case. That's no problem. Come back and I told my wife.
And she started crying. And she said, oh, we might have repercussions and all these
other things. And then what's going to happen to us and this and that. So I said, all right,
no problem. I just continued to work. I forgot about it. Then the person who got the job,
you might know her. She lives in Hodges Square, Washington, you know,
in Clay's Moose. Anyway, she got the job. And the woman, Kooni, said spell
con sage. And she asked me. And she was supposed to get my job. So this is other.
And then I had to play the same housing, same manager, Blowing Light, to do the cashier.
Because, you know, you pick up rent and so on. And she turned me down. She gave it to another
fellow, which is white. And that white person turned around, teased him when he run. And then
she got another student. And student went to university. And when the student is
absent, if she don't come in there, she'll ask me to go to cashier desk until one day.
I decide enough is enough. And when she asks me, I won't tell you what I tell her. I could tell
you privately, but I won't tell you now. So working was always a bit of a challenge
in terms of finding the rights. You said you got married. You used your wife from Sinkitz as well?
Well, you could say, yes, Sinkitz Nevis. Well, she born in Nevis, but she went to Sinkitz to live
with her father. But I didn't know until I come here. So there was a big Caribbean community here at the time?
Oh, yes. Yes. A lot. Well, what they told me that is the council move them out, put them all,
when they start developing the docks, they put them all different estates and so on. Like a lot went
to Ely, some went to Land Army, some went to Trowbridge and so on. Because that side developed
before the docks area. I think you might know some of that already.
Okay. All right. So in terms of the challenges you faced being here so far, so you had the ones with
work, you know, were there any other main challenges that you experienced being here to where you are now?
I don't know how to explain that. But I know, well, I was lucky in a sense because we form a cricket
team because when they came here first, they had a Bajoran cricket team they called Spartans. And at
the time, well, you could see in my photograph, I was skinny. And when they were playing some,
let's say a side, I mean the team or the club had picked two sides. And this fellow left them
and went to play for somebody else. But he was a Bajoran. And the fellow looked around and he
said, I look the smallest. He said, I'm serious. Now he tell me go off the field. And then me and
my brother-in-law came up. And as I said, we live in South Church Street. And, you know, it was right
by the church. This club named Spartan, not Spartan, Combine was having a meeting because they were just
farming as well. And went in there and they invited me with open arms and I went and we joined
that. And I played for Combine and we got a few more kitties and so on because it was
more or less kitties who were farming. And then we get a good side, put it away. And we used to
beat everybody. And then we didn't have much more challenges. So some of us broke away. And then we
had a better team then, a better club. We called it Progressive. And Progressive was a team we know
from St. Kitts. That's why we gave it that name. And some of the Bajorans who was in
the club, the Spartans and so on, came and joined us. And well, I was the club secretary,
treasurer secretary. And I was lucky enough. I met another, I think she born here,
she come from St. Kitts Little. Sure you might know, Donna Lyburn. No, she's in London now.
She used to work, well funny enough she and my wife used to work in David Morgan's.
And then she went and she started working for the Bay, Cardiff Bay, you know that. And
every year used to get grants for the cricket club and so on. So we was, you could say successful.
And then I was the first black man that got to say please get a cricket pitch
for our club. It overfits Allen.
The head of Cardiff Bay at the time was a man named Mr. Inking. And Mr. Inking did like cricket
so he used to go down there and we talk and talk and talk and you know he get his people
who used to work in Victoria Park. You know they do gardening and so on. And they fix up the pitch
first and then some people you know at the parts of the club think they know it all.
And when they start saying they know it all, I leave it all to them and I pull away.
But as I said you could say from the trophy when we when we joined the cricket club we joined
Cardiff Midweek League Division 4. And every year we promote from four, three, two,
till we become the champions. Even before we become champions we was beating the champions.
And then we joined the Morgana Cricket League and they put us Division 5.
And we work ourselves right up to champions as well. So we had a good good successful local
cricket team. And he said we used to have two and three trophies every year.
You played cricket in St. Kitts before you came here?
Well not at this not on that scale.
You know I mean we mostly used to play with tennis balls and then rubber balls.
So and then a little bit of this kind of cricket but not on a high scale.
How important is it do you think or how important was it to have something
like a community that you did something with and excelled in? How important was that for you?
Very important. I feel very nice. But up to now with the centre we had a lot of lot of problems.
Because well as you know we used to play home and away. And people used to get jealous because we
get jealous because we used to bring at one time I had about seven or eight coaches come here.
Right and they used to say it's a West Indian centre.
So we had problem with the local. It's a really the local
councillor at that time and the local people.
So we had a lot a lot of problems and from cricket you could say to dominos we're still having
problems. Because if you notice a lot of the people and I mean I don't have to spell it out for you
you know that they're really thinking what domino domino gets and that's fair. But we are the ones
who are supporting the place all the time. I mean if you go out there now you'll see more
domino people out there using the place. I'm not saying we spend all the a lot a lot of cash but
at least we're always here. And sometimes we spend more cash than he said for a hundred and I'm coming.
Than he said for a hundred and I'm coming.
Yes. Oh it's ongoing. I remember they had um one fellow who used to play for us his name
Ghulam. He was from South Africa. He was a nice player and he was a nice nice fellow educated fellow.
And they form because black people was getting so much problems they find a black alliance.
And they had that on the youth center used to be just across you there by the paddle
in the grounds of the two the highways flats there. It was right down to the end
because they were my welcome after that. And they had a meeting in there. Right.
And they called the counselor and the counselor tell them or tell this one fellow to go back
from where he come. The counselor said that. Yeah.
Well I don't know I'm not sure if she was the counselor at that time but she became the counselor.
So do you feel even though you had lived here for such a long time since you were 20
that you were still always an outsider. Yes. Do you still feel like an outsider. Yes because I mean
because of being people I'll tell you something. I mean a few years when I was running the bar
this fellow came in. He lived he used to live in Angelina Street and he was a big thing.
He came here a bit tipsy and when you tipsy as a barman you're not supposed to sell people more
alcohol. And he called me. I won't put it on there but an outsider.
And I must go back where I come from too.
And one night the same man he fell down out in the car park. That time we had a little car park out
there. Don't know if you remember the center before it broke down. He was a little boy. He was a
little car park out there. Don't know if you remember the center before it broke down.
But anyway there was a car park there and who had to pick him up.
You know so these are the other things.
What I didn't want to tell you yet when Chalky White was running the
youth center. Yes of course when I got married
he helped me to arrange everything like what I call it
wedding lunch or whatever you want to call it. So it was the reception.
And he do everything for me and so on. I just get the goods and everything. And
like how we used to work here then the brewery gave me a keg of beer.
And I had a lot a lot of about at least 12 cases of beer from the ship from the West Indies because
some of them we used to go down barry and pick them up and some rum and so on. So we had a very very
we had a very very good thing. We had so much and a friend of mine cooked the curry
and everybody coming back for more curry and he called me I said I ain't got no more.
Right he named Wilmot and we had so much booze that we went back the next day the Sunday
and we were still drinking.
Chalky White was from Jamaica? Yes.
So basically the West Indians that came you know after the World War II
really kind of did significant stuff in the space. Yes well nearly all as far as they understand it
nearly all West Indians who come to Cardiff branch off from in the Bay.
Nearly all as far as I know I mean the oldest one might come and go different here is if let's say
for instance me and my children come to me now that I'm living we are living now. That's why
they won't have so much connection with the Bay. But nearly everybody had connection from the Bay.
Do they all live in one area? Like people from different communities live in certain streets?
Yeah well yes some might live in let's say a lot of people as far as I hear was living South
Church Street some live in Hodges Square some live in Angelina Street, Christa in the street
and some of the houses that they broke down what they call them now like
the Suffolk Street and so on you know. They live all in different areas in the docks.
You said before you left home you would not have left if it was up to your mother.
Did you get a chance to go back home? Oh yes oh yes oh yes well
well before I left and we went back home I had to that's why God blessed me.
I have to make sure at least once a month I send make sure my mother gets something.
Every month at least she shows something sometime once or twice a month. I'll tell you something
now my mother died in 86. I had 30 pounds to send for her. I didn't get to send it and make
a guess what I done. You kept it? Yes I kept it but I put them in a frame
and I tell anybody else don't spend that money otherwise you spend the last of your life.
I'm serious because that money is for my mother or was for her and I could bring the photo
could bring the frame I'll show you. The 20 pound note and the 10 pound note.
Yeah them big ones and in the frame and that was my mother's money. You were very close to your
mother. Oh yes oh yes as I tell you everything was the only pardon me well my sister the oldest two
sisters helped me out a lot well that's why some people say no wonder you spoil and you can't cook.
Did you ever feel homesick?
Well no not at the moment because nearly every year since I catch my feet I go so I ain't got no time now but sometime a year I feel it too. I feel like I'm ready to go back.
Yeah did you ever think you were going to retire in this country or did you think you would retire?
I didn't really didn't really come across my mother. I was very close to her.
Didn't really come across my mind. God telling me was going so fast you know.
I'm curious about the identity thing so you came over as British yeah and then when you kind of came
into Utah which has its own very kind of strong identity you know you were made to feel an outsider
and you were definitely West Indian right? Oh yes I will never give up that. How do you feel now do
you feel? No way I feel no way whatsoever. You're West Indian? Yes and I will never change that. Did you ever really feel British?
No no because I mean people tell me after all these years I haven't changed my accent.
I don't know if that went through to you but because people you know you go places and they say
where you from? I said I know just like that to here. I ain't giving it up for nobody
because I make sure I got to sign his name his passport as well and my purchase passport.
When did some kids get independence? 1983 19th of September.
We went to West. Normally the service is in West Minister Abbey but they said they had it in another church
St. Mary's Abbot. Had what celebration? No not the celebration but the church service.
I went just last week. Last Thursday. To commemorate the independence? Yeah.
And I'll go that every year if possible while I have worth in my body. Why is that important to you?
It is important because my island
and I ain't giving it up for nobody.
I may not be let's say a millionaire to go back and spend all the cash but at least I go back there
and spend whatever little I have and I just like my little island. I don't know.
Okay I have another question for you. Yes. The young 20 year old yeah who came over
on that boat all those years ago. If you had to give him advice based on the experience that you've had
what advice would you give him? Well put it this way I would have think my life different
because I would have gone instead of going up and down the place I'll try get a better education
educate myself a bit better and going to real estate.
Yeah that is the job I think I would have liked.
So you would have told him to just settle down and focus.
Mm-hmm. Oh yes. Well when I was going to buy a house in Corporation Road
my wife told me don't do it because obscene is like how to call a milestone around your neck
or something like that so I listened to her but then I said to myself
I want something and when I went we are living now to buy it she said I thought I'd tell you
we want a house now I said tell you something Mrs. the only thing you could do is divorce me
because you're going to buy the house
and I should have done the same thing in
Corporation Road and when when I bought the house and start paying for it and everything
she couldn't thank me more. No I'm serious
because I explained to her we must have something to fall back to
so we may not be strong and all these other things all the time so we have to have something
and then after you see a bit of common sense
but that is one time I was determined to do what I want.
To follow your gut as well. Yeah.
So have you any regrets besides? Well I won't say regret
because I'm glad I came over here because I could afford at the time to make sure I sent something
for my mother but the only thing I always think into myself and I wouldn't know and I don't
think nobody would know for me what would happen to me if I stayed in St. Gates.
I'm serious I would let you know what would happen whether I might just start good
and upon drugs or well I never used to smoke cigarettes and I never start and I ain't
starting now but you know
different things because when I go back I see some fellows have things.
I didn't expect them to have it because at the time I'm not bossy but I was a bit more clever
than them but then I don't know how to come about it because I have a nephew right he's taken three
planks not two and he had a car right you know I don't know if you ever see the film Night Rider
Kitty he had one similar to that
so you tell me so I might be following him down the road or whatever it is because I know
my friend he had quite a few houses up to now is my good good buddy when I go back there we talk
and everything and he had a he had a few work all buses he used to charge when people charging
two and three dollars he charged one any stock if you're going from here to the shop is a dollar
if you're going from the shop or from here to be to the bottom of the road or whatever it is
still a dollar and he make a lot of money so I could be following him as well because as I say
it's my good spot but then he get caught up in drugs such big time because I could remember one
time I went home and he and I was speaking and he tell me the um the police read him and they had a
lot of American dollars a lot of thousands of US dollars from him they confiscate his money he got
drugs and then once another time he bring a lot of money and he get married and his wife he thought
he's putting the money in his wife name and she's confiscate she won't have any money
and now after all that he still come and have all these things so as I said I could
become my nephew was involved with him so I don't know how I would have fear
do you know these um these stories of people's experiences everyday stories everyday people
talking about their experiences and particularly migration and belonging and
and how you feel and to your identity how important do you think they are for
the younger generation you know like your grandchildren well I know for a fact my daughter
well I don't know how they how they view it now but some of them you're going to get into
conversation with them and they express their feelings and so on but I know my daughter for a
fact when she's in any form when they tell him about ethnicity and they're sticky and all them
artists she said she all she do is put down welch and black
you know they in no Caribbean nothing and so on she where she born here so she's welch and she's
black she ain't going around a lot of formalities and all them sort of stupidness
so you think it's important that um your grandchildren and great-grandchildren
know your story or know stories like yours do you think it's important for Wales well
well I hope the tradition goes on let them know where the roots are
because as I said and I'll keep telling you I ain't giving up my little island for nobody
so that's my where I come from my mother as I said
suffer a lot of hard time I mean
I remember one time my mother working on this stage and
she sent me for her money she said everybody know you so
when I went the pain pain pain now I may hear my mother name call yet so I went to the um
the overseer because he was there too so I said my mother said well I'm not so polished like now
I said my mother sent me for she money and me here she name call
you say boy go go away from me you're gonna not get no money this week
and from that water start coming down my eyes because I mean
she ain't getting the money what happened to us we ain't gonna get no food
and I went to him and he said
ma the man sent the money for you this week and I see my mother start to cry you know
and that make and you want to tell you I won't go into the details here but we'll tell you off
camera and so on so my sister told me the reason why because my mother won't tell me
and it's only about my sister died last year that's 18 about 19 I mean 2017 she told me the reason
she told me the reason they won't tell me
so
yeah so we meet some hard time but you see the only good thing with that my mother was a good cook
she'll take two potatoes and three yam and a dashing and so on and make something tasty out of it
it yeah so that's that's why you couldn't starve